+++ 
draft = true
date = 2020-06-16T12:00:00-04:00
title = "'Brigham Young did nothing wrong': ambiguity and the alt-right on Mormon Twitter"
slug = "it-does-have-to-be-tracaked" 
tags = ["DezNat", "Mormon Twitter", "alt-right", "George Floyd", "Ahmaud Arbery", "Breonna Taylor"]
categories = ["macro"]
+++

The recent killings of George Floyd, Ahmaud Arbery, and—here in Kentucky—Breonna Taylor and resulting protests have (like many reminders of ongoing systemic racism in the United States around the world) pushed members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to reckon with their own history with race. 

By way of summary, Brigham Young, second president of the Church, instituted a policy in 1852 that banned men of African descent from holding the priesthood (i.e., holding spiritual and ecclesiastical authority that was otherwise open to any worthy male as young as 12) and equally banned anyone of African descent from participating in sacred ceremonies in Latter-day Saint temples that are believed to be necessary for an individual to attain the highest levels of heaven. Although the policy was reversed in 1978, and the Church has since disavowed the reasons for the exclusion policy offered by Brigham Young and subsequent Church leaders, it has so far stopped short of explicitly describing Brigham Young's decision as a mistake, wrong, contrary to the will of God, etc.

The ambiguity of the Church's stance on the issue (i.e., none of the reasons previously offered for the ban are valid, but the ban itself has never been said to be invalid) has allowed for the existence of different opinions on Mormon Twitter. For some Latter-day Saints, the ban was an obvious mistake stemming from Young's racism and the Church would do well to publicly acknowledge that. For others, to quote a tweet I saw on Sunday, "Brigham Young did nothing wrong." 

I disagree with this latter opinion, but the purpose of this post is not to critique the opinion itself so much as to discuss its problematic choice of language. For the past year or so, I have been working with a colleague to study alt-right, anti-feminist, and other influences in the #DezNat Twitter hashtag. #DezNat is an abbreviation of "Deseret Nation," a reference to the pre-Utah territory de facto governed by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, with Brigham Young at its head. 

Although DezNat participants have repeatedly suggested it is dedicated solely to defending the Church and is free from any political influence, this doesn't hold up under even the most distant of close scrutiny. Tweets using the hashtag during August 2018 (its first month of existence) express eagerness for society to collapse, embrace the "nationalist" label, contain anti-immigrant rhetoric, and echo white nationalism's Dylann Roof-inspired ["[n]ostalgia for Rhodesia ... a subtle and profitable form of racist messaging"](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/10/magazine/rhodesia-zimbabwe-white-supremacists.html). In the April 2019 data that my research is focused on, there is more devotional and apologetic content, and references to the far right tend to be more subtle than "Make Rhodesia Great Again." However, they're still there if you know what to look for. 

DezNat participants' claims that "Brigham Young did nothing wrong" must be evaluated in this context. "X did nothing wrong"  is a snowclone—to [quote Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snowclone), "a cliché and phrasal template that can be used and recognized in multiple variants." For example, the `r/thanosdidnothingwrong` [subreddit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reddit#Subreddits) was created after the release of *Avengers: Infinity War* to suggest that the [movie's villain](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thanos_(Marvel_Cinematic_Universe) was actually in the right. 

The [origins of the snowclone](https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/hitler-did-nothing-wrong) are a bit more sinister, though. They date back to a 2012 [4chan](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/4chan) trolling campaign that resulted in "Hitler did nothing wrong" reaching the top spot in a contest to name a new flavor of Mountain Dew. 

So, am I suggesting that "Brigham Young did nothing wrong" is further evidence of far right influence in this hashtag? Not exactly. It's more complicated than that, and that may actually be more troubling. The truth is that there's no way to conclusively demonstrate that "Brigham Young did nothing wrong" is an intentional reference to the original "Hitler did nothing wrong." If all snowclone iterations carry with them the moral weight of the original phrase, then directors Anthony and Joe Russo and actor Josh Brolin should be censured for [participating in r/thanosdidnothingwrong](https://screenrant.com/josh-brolin-thanos-snap-reddit-ban/), as that would also indicate far right sympathies. However, it's clear that the far right hasn't forgotten about the origins of "X did nothing wrong." Consider this excerpt from a ProPublica article: 

> In between sessions, men milled about wearing shirts popular with the extreme right-wing group Proud Boys. One of the shirts read, “Yamaguchi did nothing wrong.” Otoya Yamaguchi was a Japanese ultranationalist who murdered the head of Japan’s socialist party. The back of the shirt shows an image of the killing.

The phrasing of "did nothing wrong" to defend Brigham Young (or, as seen in other DezNat tweets, contemporary church leader Dallin Oaks) could be an appeal to a clichéd phrase to make a point. However, one cannot rule out the possibliity that it plays on a deliberate intertextuality so that those in the know 