+++ 
draft = true
date = 2019-02-15T9:00:00-05:00
title = "What is permitted vs. what is right: Games and ethical decision-making"
slug = "what-is-permitted-what-is-right" 
tags = ["games and learning", "ethics", "games", "ethics education]
categories = ["macro"]
+++
Although I'm mostly a social media researcher right now, I applied to grad school as someone who was interested in the educational potential of games, and I've been fortunate enough to pull that hat out of the closet and put it on a little more frequently over the past couple of months. One of the projects I've been especially interested in moving forward is one that focuses on exploring when students/players adopt "ethical identities" (i.e., perceive their actions as ethically salient) within a game. My interest in this subject isn't based on any personal hand-wringing about violent video games (though I will admit that I don't play first-person shooters because rub me the wrong way). Rather, I've long felt that games provide an interesting sandbox for trying out ethical reflection and decision-making, and I'm curious about the circumstances under which players recognize and take advantage of that potential.

Much of this stems back to an experience I had years ago. Once, in college, I spent a couple of hours one afternoon playing a tabletop wargame (specifically, [Tactics II](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tactics_(game))) with my brother-in-law. There wasn't much of a story behind the game: The Blue Nation and the Red Nation were simply fed up with sharing the same island and had decided to go to war. We each had some soldiers, tanks, and paratroopers to carry out our goal of taking over the enemy's cities, and in case of emergency, we both had a small number of nuclear weapons we could use to regain the upper hand. I got off to a strong start in the game (this was less a function of my skill as of it was of the fact that I was the one who owned the game, and my brother-in-law had never seen it before that day), and before long, I had invaded his capital city, which he wasn't terribly happy about. He hemmed and hawed over what to do next, considering his options and consulting the rules. Finally, he pointed to one of my tanks, which was sitting right in the middle of his capital city, and announced that he'd be using one of his nuclear missiles to wipe it right off the map.

I was flabbergasted. Here was my brother-in-law, proposing to nuke his own city just to get rid of one of my units. But I hemmed and hawed, considering his option and consulting the rules, and realized that it was a perfectly legal move. No rule in the game said that you couldn't launch a missile against your own city, and the game didn't even keep track of civilian lives, so there wasn't even any penalty for doing so. I begrudgingly admitted that not only was this a legal move—it was probably the best move he could have made in the moment. 

I have thought a lot about this moment in the years since (this anecdote even served as the basis of my personal statement for most of my grad school applications), and [the news that Amazon would not be paying any federal taxes in 2018](http://fortune.com/2019/02/14/amazon-doesnt-pay-federal-taxes-2019/) got me thinking more about it. As far as I can tell, what Amazon is doing is perfectly legal. It's probably even "the best move [they] could have made in the moment" given what's currently allowed and what typically passes for "victory conditions" for companies and their executives. That said, I can't help 